add README for docs/zq (#3722)
brimdata/zed: docs/zq/README.md

# zq - command-line Zed query

## TL;DR

> > `zq` is a command-line tool that uses the [Zed language](language.md)
> for pipeline-style search and analytics language.  `zq` can query a variety

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> `zq` is a command-line tool that uses the [Zed language](language.md)
for pipeline-style search and analytics.  `zq` can query a variety
```

of data formats in files, over HTTP, or in S3 storage

> It is particularly fast when you operating over the Zed-native ZNG format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is particularly fast when operating on data in the Zed-native ZNG format.
```

>
> The `zq` design philosophy blends the query/search-tool approach
of `jq`, `awk`, `grep` with the command-line, embedded database approach
of `sqlite` and `duckdb`.
>
> Most examples of Zed are provided as `zq` one liners, but this is just
one way of using Zed as anything running at desktop-scale as a `zq` command

> can be run at cloud scale using a Zed lake.

Reviewer: This doesn't feel like TL;DR material to me.

Author: I'll just take it out

## Contents

* [1. Usage](#1-usage)
* [2. Input Formats](#2-input-formats)
  + [2.1 Hardwired Input Format](#21-hardwired-input-format)
  + [2.1 Auto-detection](#22-auto-detection)
  + [2.3 ZSON-JSON Auto-detection](#23-zson-json-auto-detection)
* [3. Output Formats](#3-output-formats)
  + [3.1 Output Format Selection](#31-output-format-selection)
  + [3.2 ZSON Pretty Printing](#32-zson-pretty-printing)
  + [3.3 Pipeline-friendly ZNG](#33-pipeline-friendly-zng)
  + [3.4 Schema-rigid Outputs](#34-schema-rigid-outputs)
    - [3.4.1 Fusing Schemas](#341-fusing-schemas)
    - [3.4.2 Splitting Schemas](#342-splitting-schemas)
* [4. Query Debugging](#4-query-debugging)
* [5. Error Handling](#5-error-handling)
* [6. Examples](#6-examples)
* [7. Performance](#7-performance)
  + [7.1 Fast Pattern Matching](#71-fast-pattern-matching)
  + [7.2 Efficient JSON Processing](#72-efficient-json-processing)
  + [7.3 Performance Comparisons](#73-performance-comparisons)
    - [7.3.1 Test Data](#731-test-data)
    - [7.3.2 File Sizes](#732-file-sizes)
    - [7.3.3 Tests](#733-tests)
    - [7.3.4 Results](#734-results)

## 1. Usage

```

> zq [ options ] [ query ] file [ file ... ]

Reviewer: Since positional arguments can also be HTTP, HTTPS, or S3 URLs, so maybe call these "inputs" instead of "files", both here and below?

so there is no need to represent non-readable formats like Avro or Protocol Buffers
in a clunky JSON encapsulated form.  

`zq` typically operates on ZNG-encoded data and when you want to inspect
human-readable bits of output, you merely format it as ZSON, which is the
default format when output is directed to the terminal.  ZNG is default
when redirecting to a non-terminal output like a file or pipe.

When run with file arguments, each file's format is automatically inferred
([as described below](#21-auto-detection)) and each file is scanned
in the order appearing on the command line forming the input stream.

A query expressed in the [Zed language](language.md)
may be optionally specified and applied to the input stream.

If no query is specified, the input files are all scanned without modification
and output in the desired format as described below.  This latter approach
provides a convenient means to convert files from one format to another.

To determine whether the first argument is query or a file,
`zq` checks the local file system for the existence of a file by that name.
If no such file exists, it attempts to parse the text as a Zed program.

> If both checks fail, then an error is reported and `zq` exits.

Reviewer: It also checks whether the first argument is an HTTP, HTTPS, or S3 URL.

This heuristic is convenient but can result in a rare surprise when a simple
Zed query (like a keyword search) happens to correspond with a file of the
same name in the local directory.
To avoid this, you can provide the query with the `-query` flag, which specified
the Zed program to run and forces all arguments to be interpreted as input files.

When `zq` is run with a `query` and no file arguments, then the query must

> begin with a [yield operator](operators/yield.md) and the query is run with

Reviewer: It can also begin with `file`, `from`, or `get`!

a single input  value of `null`.  This provides a convenient means to run in a
"calculator mode" where input is produced by the yield and can be operated upon
by the Zed query, e.g.,
```mdtest-command
zq -z '1+1'
```
emits
```mdtest-output
2
```
Note here that the query `1+1` [implies](language.md#26-implied-operators)
`yield 1+1`.

## 2. Input Formats

`zq` currently supports the following input formats:

|  Option   | Auto | Specifiction                             |
|-----------|------|------------------------------------------|

> | `json`    |  yes | [JSON RFC-8259](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259.html) |
> | `csv`     |  yes | [CSV RFC-4180](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4180.html) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `json`    |  yes | [JSON RFC 8259](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259.html) |
| `csv`     |  yes | [CSV RFC 4180](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4180.html) |
```

* an explicit or implied [yield operator](operators/yield.md).

In the case of a `yield` with no inputs, the query is run with
a single input value of `null`.  This provides a convenient means to run in a
"calculator mode" where input is produced by the yield and can be operated upon
by the Zed query, e.g.,
```mdtest-command
zq -z '1+1'
```
emits
```mdtest-output
2
```
Note here that the query `1+1` [implies](language.md#26-implied-operators)
`yield 1+1`.

## 2. Input Formats

`zq` currently supports the following input formats:

|  Option   | Auto | Specifiction                             |
|-----------|------|------------------------------------------|
| `json`    |  yes | [JSON RFC 8259](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259.html) |
| `csv`     |  yes | [CSV RFC 4180](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4180.html) |
| `parquet` |  no  | [Apache Parquet](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format) |
| `zson`    |  yes | [ZSON - Human-readable Format](../formats/zson.md) |
| `zng`     |  yes | [ZNG - Binary Row Format](../formats/zson.md) |
| `zst`     |  no  | [ZST - Binary Columnar Format](../formats/zst.md) |
| `zjson`   |  yes | [ZJSON - Zed over JSON](../formats/zjson.md) |

> | `zeek`    |  yes | [Zeek Logs](https://docs.zeek.org/en/master/logs/index.html) |

Author: I had deliberately sorted by relevance to a newcomer audience.

> | `zeek`    |  yes | [Zeek Logs](https://docs.zeek.org/en/master/logs/index.html) |

Author: Maybe we should remove zeek?

> | `zeek`    |  yes | [Zeek Logs](https://docs.zeek.org/en/master/logs/index.html) |

Reviewer: I think we should keep it.

zq -f zng 'yield 1,[1,2,3]' > a.zng
zq -f zng 'yield {s:"hello"},{s:"world"}' > b.zng
cat a.zng b.zng | zq -z -
```
produces
```mdtest-output
1
[1,2,3]
{s:"hello"}
{s:"world"}
```
And while this ZSON output is human readable, the ZNG files are binary, e.g.,
```mdtest-command
zq -f zng 'yield 1,[1,2,3]' > a.zng
hexdump -C a.zng
```
produces
```mdtest-output
00000000  02 00 01 09 1b 00 09 02  02 1e 07 02 02 02 04 02  |................|
00000010  06 ff                                             |..|
00000012
```

### 3.4 Schema-rigid Outputs

Certain data formats like Parquet are "schema rigid" in the sense that they
require a schema to be defined before values can be written into the file and
all the values in the file must conform to the same type.

Zed, however, has a fine-grained type system instead of schemas and a sequence
of data values are completely self-describing and may be heterogeneous in nature.
This creates a challenge converting the type-flexible Zed formats to a schema-rigid
format like Parquet.

For example, this seemingly simple conversion:
```mdtest-command-skip-stderr-no-work
echo '{x:1}{s:"hello"}' | zq -o out.parquet -f parquet -
```
causes this error

> ```mdtest-output-skip

Author: I put `fails` in the wrong pace.  Fixed now.

[first-class Zed errors](language.md#53-first-class-errors)
in the data output stream interleaved with any valid results.
Such errors are easily queried with the
[is_error function](functions/is_error.md).

This approach provides a robust technique for debugging complex query pipelines,
where errors can be wrapped in one another providing stack-trace like debugging
output alongside the output data.  This approach has emerged as a more powerful
alternative to the traditional technique of looking through logs for errors
or trying to debug a halted program with a vague error message.

For example, this query
```
echo '1 2 0 3' |  zq '10.0/this' -
```
produces
```
10.
5.
error("divide by zero")
3.3333333333333335
```
and
```
echo '1 2 0 3' |  zq '10.0/this' - | zq 'is_error(this)' -
```
produces just
```
error("divide by zero")
```

## 6. Examples

As you may have noticed, many examples of the [Zed language](language.md)
are illustrated using this pattern
```
echo <values> | zq <query> -
```
which is used throughout the [language documentation](language.md)
and [operator reference](reference.md).

The language documenation and [tutorials directory](../tutorials)

> have many examples, but here are a few more simple cases of `zq.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have many examples, but here are a few more simple cases of `zq`.
```

```
echo '1 1.5 [1,"foo"] |["apple","banana"]|' | zq -z 'yield typeof(this)' -
```
produces
```
<int64>
<float64>
<[(int64,string)]>
<|[string]|>
```
_A simple aggregation_
```
echo '{key:"foo",val:1}{key:"bar",val:2}{key:"foo",val:3}' | zq -z 'sum(val) by key | sort key' -
```
produces
```
{key:"bar",sum:2}
{key:"foo",sum:4}
```
_Convert CSV to Zed and cast a to an integer from default float_
```
printf "a,b\n1,foo\n2,bar\n" | zq 'a:=int64(a)' -
```
produces
```
{a:1,b:"foo"}
{a:2,b:"bar"}
```
_Convert JSON to Zed and cast a to an integer from default float_
```
echo '{"a":1,"b":"foo"}{"a":2,"b":"bar"}' | zq 'a:=int64(a)' -
```
produces
```
{a:1,b:"foo"}
{a:2,b:"bar"}
```
_Make a schema-rigid Parquet file using fuse and turn it back into Zed_
```
echo '{a:1}{a:2}{b:3}' | zq -f parquet -o tmp.parquet fuse -
zq -z -i parquet tmp.parquet
```
produces
```
{a:1,b:null(int64)}
{a:2,b:null(int64)}
{a:null(int64),b:3}
```

## 7. Performance

Your mileage may vary, but many new users of `zq` are surprised by its speed
compared to tools like `jq`, `grep`, `awk`, or `sqlite` especially when running
`zq` over files in the ZNG format.

### 7.1 Fast Pattern Matching

> One important technique that `zq` to run fast is to take advantage of queries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One important technique that helps `zq` to run fast is to take advantage of queries
```

that involve fine-grained searches.

When a query begins with a logical expression containing either a search
or a predicate match with a constant value, and presuming the input data format
is ZNG, then the runtime optimizes the query by performing an efficient,
byte-oriented "pre-search" of the values required in the predicate.  This pre-search
scans the bytes that comprise a large buffer of values and looks for these values

> and  if they are not present, the entire buffer is discarded knowing no individual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and, if they are not present, the entire buffer is discarded knowing no individual
```

> value in that buffer could have been found because the required serialized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
value in that buffer could match because the required serialized
```

> values were nowhere present in the buffer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
values were not present in the buffer.
```

and processed in parallel.  This allows the decompression and pre-search to
run in parallel very efficiently across a large number of threads.  When searching
for sparse results, many frames are discarded without their uncompressed bytes
having to be processed any further.

While this pre-search technique results in very fast brute-force pattern matching,
[search indexes](../zed/README.md#search-indexes)
can also be created when Zed data is managed by a Zed lake
thereby avoiding scans of data altogether as the index pinpoints the locations
of specific values in the lake.

### 7.2 Efficient JSON Processing

While processing data in the ZNG format is far more efficient than JSON,
there is substantial JSON data in the world and it is important for JSON
input to perform well.

This proved a challenge as `zq` is written in Go and Go's JSON package
is not particularly performant.  To this end, `zq` has its own lean and simple
[JSON tokenizer](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/brimdata/zed/pkg/jsonlexer),
which performs quite well,
and is
[integrated tightly](https://github.com/brimdata/zed/blob/main/zio/jsonio/reader.go)
with Zed's internal data representation.

> Moreover, like jq,
> zq's JSON parser does not values objects to be newline delimited and can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, like `jq`,
`zq`'s JSON parser does not values objects to be newline delimited and can
```

incrementally parse the input to minimize memory overhead and improve
processor cache performance.

The net effect is a JSON parser that is typically a bit faster than the
native C implementation in `jq`.

### 7.3 Performance Comparisons

> To provide a rough sense the performance tradeoffs between `zq` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To provide a rough sense of the performance tradeoffs between `zq` and
```

other tooling, this section provides a few results of a few simple speed tests.

#### 7.3.1 Test Data

These tests are easy to reproduce.  The input data comes from the
[Zed sample data respository](https://github.com/brimdata/zed-sample-data),
where we used a semi-structured Zeek "conn" log from the `zeek-default` directory.

It is easy to convert the Zeek logs to a local ZNG file using

> zq's built-in `get` operator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`zq`'s built-in `get` operator:
```

```
zq -o conn.zng 'get https://raw.githubusercontent.com/brimdata/zed-sample-data/main/zeek-default/conn.log.gz'
```

> This creates a new file `conn.zng` from the Zeek log file fetched from Github.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This creates a new file `conn.zng` from the Zeek log file fetched from GitHub.
```

Note that this data is a gzip'd file in the Zeek format and `zq`'s auto-detector

> figure out both that it is gzip'd and that that the uncompressed format is Zeek.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
figures out both that it is gzip'd and that that the uncompressed format is Zeek.
```

No need to specify flags for this.

Next, a JSON file can be converted from ZNG using:
```
zq -f json conn.zng > conn.json
```

> Note here that we lose information in this conversation because the rich data types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note here that we lose information in this conversion because the rich data types
```

> of Zed (that were translated from the Zeek format).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of Zed (that were translated from the Zeek format) are lost.
```

We'll also make a SQLite database in the file `conn.db` as the table named `conn`.
One easy way to do this is to install
[sqlite-utils](https://sqlite-utils.datasette.io/en/stable/)
and run
```
sqlite-utils insert conn.db conn conn.json --nl
```
(If you need a cup of coffee, a good time to get it would be when
loading the JSON into SQLite.)

#### 7.3.2 File Sizes

Note the resulting file sizes:
```
% du -h conn.json conn.db conn.zng
416M	conn.json
192M	conn.db
 38M	conn.zng
```
Much of the performance of ZNG derives from an efficient, parallelizable
structure where frames of data are compressed
(currently with [LZ4](http://lz4.github.io/lz4/) though the
specification supports multiple algorithms) and the sequence of values
can be processed with only partial deserialization.

That said, there are quite a few more opportunities to further improve
the performance of `zq` and the Zed system and we have a number of projects
forthcoming on this front.

#### 7.3.3 Tests

> We ran three styles of testson a Mac quad-core 2.3GHz i7:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We ran three styles of tests on a Mac quad-core 2.3GHz i7:
```

* `count` - compute the number of values present
* `search` - find a value in a field
* `agg` - sum a field grouped by another field

Each test was run for `jq`, `zq` on JSON, `sqlite3`, and `zq` on ZNG.

> We used the bash `time` command to measure elapsed time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We used the Bash `time` command to measure elapsed time.
```

shown in parentheses:

|  | `count` | `search` | `agg` |
|------|---------------|---------------|---------------|
| `jq` | 11,540ms (1X) | 10,730ms (1X) | 20,175ms (1X) |
| `zq-json` | 7,150ms (1.6X) | 7,230ms (1.5X)  | 7,390ms (2.7X) |
| `sqlite` | 100ms (115X) | 620ms (17X) | 1,475ms (14X) |
| `zq-zng` | 110ms (105X) | 135ms (80X) | 475ms (42X) |

To summarize, `zq` with ZNG is consistently fastest though `sqlite`
was a bit faster counting rows.

In particular, `zq` is substantially faster (40-100X) than `jq` with the efficient
ZNG format but more modestly faster (50-170%) when processing the bulky JSON input.
This is expected because parsing JSON becomes the bottleneck.

While SQLite is much faster than `jq`, it is not as fast as `zq`.  The primary
reason for this is that SQLite stores its semi-structured columns as minified JSON text,
so it must scan and parse the JSON when executing the _where_ clause above
as well as the aggregated fields.

Also, note that the inferior performance of `sqlite` is in areas where databases
perform extraordinarily well if you do the work to
(1) transform semi-structured columns to relational columns by flattening

> the nested the JSON objects (which are not indexable by `sqlite`) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nested JSON objects (which are not indexable by `sqlite`) and
```
